=head1 HISTORY

The Template Toolkit began its life as the Text::MetaText module,
originally released to CPAN around 1996.  This itself was the public
manifestation of an earlier template processing system I developed
while working at Peritas (now Knowledge Pool -
 http://www.knowledgepool.com/)

Text::MetaText was the prototype - the one we always planned to throw
away.  It did the job well, showing us what worked and what didn't, what
was good and what was bad, and gave us some ideas about what could be
done better, given the chance to start again from scratch.

Some time late in 1998 I threw away the prototype and started work on
the Template Toolkit.  By then I was working at Canon Research Centre
Europe Ltd. (http://www.cre.canon.co.uk), involved in a general
research programme related to web publishing and dynamic content
generation.  The first alpha release was in June 1999, followed by
numerous more alpha and beta releases culminating in 1.00 being
released on 2nd December 1999.

A month or so later, work had begun on version 2.00.  The plan was to
get the template language relatively stable in version 1.00 and not
worry too much about performance or other internal matters.  Then,
version 2.00 would follow to improve performance, clean up the
architecture and fix anything that, with the benefit of hindsight, we
thought could be improved.  As it happens, me starting work on version
2.00 coincided with Doug Steinwand sending me his parser variant which
compiled templates to Perl code, giving a major performance boost.  
As well as the speedups, there are a whole host of significant new 
features in version 2.00, and a greatly improved internal architecture.
Apart from a few minor "fixups" the template directives and language 
have remained the same as in version 1.00

Version 2.00 was available in beta release form in July 2000, just 
in time for the 4th Perl Conference where version 1.00 was awarded
"Best New Perl Module".  After another extended beta release period,
version 2.00 was released on 1st December 2000.


